feat(blog): node.js test migration (#993)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/node-test-migration.mdx

---

> title: "Migration to Node.js test runner: a retrospective"

Reviewer: Can I make a title pitch: 

- "Migrating 500 tests from Mocha to node:test"
- "Migrating 500 tests from Mocha to Node.js"

Either of these -- or something in a similar vein -- sound significantly more interesting if you imagine someone scrolling on Twitter, Hacker News, etc. which would ultimately lead to more readers.

Only thing I can't think of is a better name for the "Node.js Test Runner" but I think "to Node.js" captures it while leaving a little room for intrigue (wait, what do they mean "to Node.js").

Reviewer 2: Is Node.js not confusing to you? Mocha runs on Node.js too. I like using node:test though

description: "A retrospective of how Astro migrated more than 500 test suites from Mocha to Node.js test runner."

> publishDate: "February 15, 2024"

Reviewer 2: Update the date to date we are going to publish, tomorrow maybe?

authors:
  - ema
  - bjorn
lang: "en"
---

Over a month ago, we discussed a possible migration to the Node.js test runner. While we were sufficiently happy with Mocha, we are always looking to make our CI jobs faster.

Relying on a test runner baked inside our runtime had some advantages for our main monorepo:
- Two fewer dependencies to install and maintain in our monorepo: `mocha` and `chai`.
- Maintainability, as there are way more people involved in the Node.js project (hence the Node.js test runner).

> - The test runner will improve with time, and eventually save some time in our CI workflows.

Reviewer 2: When you say improve, you mean performance wise? If so I think it should be stated clearly.

> Relying on a test runner baked inside our runtime had some advantages for our main monorepo:
> - two fewer dependencies to install and maintain in our monorepo: `mocha` and `chai`;
> - maintainability, there are way more people involved in the Node.js project (hence the Node.js test runner);
> - we believe that the test runner will get better and better with the time, and eventually save some time in our CI workflows.

Reviewer 3: Since the bullet points form full sentences, the grammatically correct usage would be starting with capital letters and ending with punctuation, as far as I know. I've also rewritten them a bit to be more concise.
```suggestion
Relying on a test runner baked inside our runtime had some advantages for our main monorepo:
- Two fewer dependencies to install and maintain in our monorepo: `mocha` and `chai`.
- Maintainability, as there are way more people involved in the Node.js project (hence the Node.js test runner).
- The test runner will improve with time, and eventually save some time in our CI workflows.
```

## From an idea to a PoC

> The Astro monorepo has more than 500 testing suites: between integration tests and unit tests, we have 664 suites, with a total of 1603 tests. Tha majority of these tests are **integration** tests.

Reviewer 3: Typo
```suggestion
The Astro monorepo has more than 500 testing suites: between integration tests and unit tests, we have 664 suites, with a total of 1603 tests. The majority of these tests are **integration** tests.
```

> An integration test, in our monorepo, means the creation of tiny Astro project, building a project with a specific environment - development, static generation (SSG) or dynamic generation (SSR), and run assertions over the **built** pages. That's right, each integration test requires `vite` to build and bundle the project.

Reviewer 3: A few grammar nits
```suggestion
An integration test, in our monorepo, means the creation of a tiny Astro project, building a project with a specific environment - development, static generation (SSG), or dynamic generation (SSR), and running assertions over the **built** pages. That's right, each integration test requires `vite` to build and bundle the project.
```

> We didn't start the migration right away. Before taking a final decision, we wanted to make sure that moving away from Mocha was a mistake. Despite its quirks, Mocha is a **fine** test runner, it's been around for a long time, it is battle-tested. If you use Mocha, you are in good hands.

Reviewer 3: Nits
```suggestion
We didn't start the migration right away. Before making a final decision, we wanted to make sure that moving away from Mocha was a mistake. Despite its quirks, Mocha is a **fine** test runner, it's been around for a long time, and it is battle-tested. If you use Mocha, you are in good hands.
```

> The idea of the PoC was to understand:
> - the flexibility of the Node.js CLI arguments and how customisable can be the test reporters;
> - the speed of execution of the testing suites;
> - the overall developer experience;

Reviewer 3: These are "sentence-fragment" bullet points, here capitalization is optional, but since I generally see us going for capitalization, I would do the same here. Also, typo: `customisable` -> `customizable`
```suggestion
The idea of the PoC was to understand:
- The flexibility of the Node.js CLI arguments and how customizable can be the test reporters.
- The speed of execution of the testing suites.
- The overall developer experience.
```

1. It had trouble parsing the glob syntax when passing multiple arguments, e.g. `node --test "test/*.test.js" --test-name-pattern="foo"`.
2. It wasn't possible to pass the `--test-concurrency` flag (only available in Node.js 21 and above), but can be worked around by using the [programmatic API](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#testname-options-fn) `concurrency` option.
3. Nitpicking, but the argument names were verbose, e.g. `--test-name-pattern` instead of `--match, -m` arguments, `--test-timeout` instead of `--timeout, -t` arguments, etc. 

Hence, to solve these issues, we created a [custom script](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/3757a212c01cee03b8e96e1e9697a187ae7cc290/scripts/cmd/test.js) which can be called with the `astro-scripts test` command. This decision also proved to be useful to enable more workarounds as we'll see later.

> ### The pandora box

Reviewer 3: Nit
```suggestion
### The Pandora's box
```

In a second step, we attempted to migrate the testing suites of the `@astrojs/node` package. This integration is one of our most downloaded integrations, so we have plenty of tests. Plus, the tests of this package all have **integration tests**, so it was a good opportunity to check the performance of the test runner.

Once the PR was ready, we noticed that _Node.js test runner_ **was way slower** than Mocha. We investigated, and we discovered that Node.js spawns a new process for each test file to assure that each testing suite is run in **isolation**. Running a testing suite in isolation is, generally, a good practice, because it assures that tests run in an unpolluted environment.

> However, our testing suites are already isolated, in fact we were able to run our testing suites using the main thread with Mocha, without running into issues: side effects, polluted environments, etc. Unfortunately, Node.js didn't provide an option to _run all tests in the same thread_, so we have to come up with a solution (aren't we engineers, after all? we solve problems!).

Reviewer 3: Here I think the parenthesis should be capitalized, it makes an exclamation and interrupts the flow of the sentence.
```suggestion
However, our testing suites are already isolated, in fact we were able to run our testing suites using the main thread with Mocha, without running into issues: side effects, polluted environments, etc. Unfortunately, Node.js didn't provide an option to _run all tests in the same thread_, so we have to come up with a solution (Aren't we engineers, after all? We solve problems!).
```

Using our internal `astro-scripts test` command, we are able to workaround this by creating a _temporary file that **imports** all the testing suites_, and we let Node.js test that single file. This way, only one process is spawned for the file, and we reach the same level of performance as if we were using the main process.

However, this **came with a downside**: if there's a test failure or a timeout, we aren't able to tell which test is the cause. This was the main quirk we found, and we accepted the trade-off. After all, we also accepted Mocha's trade-offs!

### Node.js `assert` and `chai`

> During the migration, we had to remove the `chai` library for `node:assert/strict`. This task uncovered that with `chai`, you can execute the same check in different ways. For example, you can run an equality check at least in **four** different ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During the migration, we had to remove the `chai` library for `node:assert/strict`. This task uncovered that with `chai` there are several different methods for the same assertion. For example, you can run an equality check at least in **four** different ways:
```

```js
import { expect } from "chai";

expect("foo").to.eq("foo")
expect("foo").to.be.eq("foo")
expect("foo").to.equal("foo")
expect("foo").to.be.equal("foo")
```

> From one point of view, it's good to have this kind of flexibility, but on the other hand the code of the tests becomes inconsistent. With the Node.js assertion module, you do this kind of check only in one way:

Reviewer 3: Comma nit.
```suggestion
From one point of view, it's good to have this kind of flexibility, but on the other hand, the code of the tests becomes inconsistent. With the Node.js assertion module, you do this kind of check only in one way:
```

```js
import { assert } from "node:assert/strict";

assert.equal("foo", "foo")
```

> The Node.js assertion module **provides almost all functionalities** we required, so the migration from `chai` wasn't as painful as we thought. Our usage of `chai` was very minimal. However, **we miss** the `.includes` shortcut of `chai`:

Reviewer 3: sorry for being so pedantic, lol
```suggestion
The Node.js assertion module **provides almost all the functionalities** we required, so the migration from `chai` wasn't as painful as we thought. Our usage of `chai` was very minimal. However, **we miss** the `.includes` shortcut of `chai`:
```

```js
import { expect } from "chai";

expect("It's a fine day").includes("fine")
```

> The Node.js assertion module doesn't provide such utility, so we ended up using the equality assertion with the `String#includes` function:

Reviewer 2: Worth mentioning that the trade-off that this produces worse error messages on failures?

```js
import assert from "node:assert/strict";

assert.equal("It's a fine day".includes("fine"), true)
```

### Here comes the dragons

> As mentioned before, we have a lot of test files, and we add new tests almost every day. Opening a one-off PR that does the migration of the whole monorepo is unfeasible, it would require a lot of work from one person, and keeping the branch updated can be stressful.

Reviewer 3: Small cut ✂️ 
```suggestion
As mentioned before, we have a lot of test files, and we add new tests almost every day. Opening a one-off PR that migrates the whole monorepo is unfeasible, it would require a lot of work from one person, and keeping the branch updated can be stressful.
```

So we came up with a simple plan:
1. Migrate first the small packages inside the monorepo
2. Slowly migrate the main package - `astro` - by having Mocha and Node.js test runner in the same CI
3. Remove Mocha

In order to achieve that, we **asked help to our community**. We thought this was the **perfect** opportunity to let people that **aren't familiar** with Astro business logic to contribute to the project, and we could make the migration way faster.

We created and pinned an [umbrella issue](https://github.com/withastro/astro/issues/9873) to coordinate the efforts. We used this issue as a coordination hub. Each contributor **took ownership** of the migration of each package, and they opened a PR for each package. Two new first-contributor joined the efforts. It was a fantastic thing to see. In **one week**, we were able to migrate all packages!

> Migrating the main package `astro` was a feat. It's the package that contains the highest number of tests. In order to slowly migrate the tests, we had to come up with an out-of-the-box solution. We set up the Node.js test runner to test only the files called `*.nodetest.js`. Doing so, it allowed us to keep testing all files in the CI. Then, the rest was just a matter of coordination a delivering:
> 1. use the umbrella issue to tell other contributors which files a contributor wanted to migrate;
> 2. rename the files to migrate from `*.test.js` to `*.nodetest.js`;
> 3. migrate the files;
> 4. open a PR, wait for a review and merge the PR.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Migrating the main package `astro` was a feat. It's the package that contains the highest number of tests. In order to slowly migrate the tests, we had to come up with an out-of-the-box solution. We set up the Node.js test runner to test only the files called `*.nodetest.js`. Doing so, it allowed us to keep testing all files in the CI. Then, the rest was just a matter of coordinating the delivery:
1. Use the umbrella issue to tell other contributors which files a contributor wanted to migrate.
2. Rename the files to migrate from `*.test.js` to `*.nodetest.js`.
3. Migrate the files.
4. Open a PR, wait for a review and merge the PR.
```

> With the help of [@log101](https://github.com/log101), [@mingjunlu](https://github.com/mingjunlu), [@VoxelMC](https://github.com/VoxelMC), [@alexnguyennz](https://github.com/alexnguyennz), [@xMohamd](https://github.com/xMohamd), [@shoaibkh4n](https://github.com/shoaibkh4n), [@marwan-mohamed12](https://github.com/marwan-mohamed12), we migrated almost 300 test suites in **one week**!

Author: Added them!

### The results

We are quite **happy** with the results. We **haven't seen** any significant **regression in the performance** of our tests. The assertion module that Node.js provides has all utilities we needed, and the `describe`/`it` pattern is supported, so the migration from Mocha was smooth.

There are still few hiccups regarding the developer experience, when comparing it to Mocha.

> For example for running *one* single test suite, with Mocha just a `it.only` is enough. With Node.js test runner you have to:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, to run *one* single test suite with Mocha you just need to add `it.only` to the specific test. However, in the Node.js test runner, the process involves a few more steps:
```

> 1. run the CLI using the `--test-only` argument
> 2. add the `.only` to the `describe` that contains the `it.only` you want to run
> 3. if there are multiple `describe`, all of them needs to be marked with `.only`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
1. Run the CLI using the `--test-only` argument.
2. Append `.only` to the `describe` block that encloses the target `it.only` you want to run.
3. If there are multiple `describe` blocks, each one must be marked with `.only`.
```

---
title: "Migrating 500+ tests from Mocha to Node.js"
description: "A retrospective of how Astro migrated more than 500 test suites from Mocha to Node.js test runner."
publishDate: "March 21, 2024"
authors:
  - ema
  - bjorn
lang: "en"
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/test-migration/og_astro_test_migration.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/test-migration/header_astro_test_migration.webp"
---

Over a month ago, we discussed a possible migration to the Node.js test runner. While we were sufficiently happy with Mocha, we are always looking to make our CI jobs faster.

Relying on a test runner baked inside our runtime had some advantages for our main monorepo:
- two fewer dependencies to install and maintain in our monorepo: `mocha` and `chai`;
- maintainability, there are way more people involved in the Node.js project (hence the Node.js test runner);
- we believe that the test runner will get better and better with the time, and eventually save some time in our CI workflows.

## From an idea to a PoC

> The Astro monorepo has more than 500 testing suites: between integration tests and unit tests, we have 664 suites, with a total of 1603 tests. Tha majority of these tests are **integration** tests.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Astro monorepo has more than 500 testing suites: between integration tests and unit tests, we have 664 suites, with a total of 1603 tests. The majority of these tests are **integration** tests.
```

> An integration test, in our monorepo, means the creation of tiny Astro project, building a project with a specific environment - development, static generation (SSG) or dynamic generation (SSR), and run assertions over the **built** pages. That's right, each integration test requires `vite` to build and bundle the project.
> 
> We didn't start the migration right away. Before taking a final decision, we wanted to make sure that moving away from Mocha was a mistake. Despite its quirks, Mocha is a **fine** test runner, it's been around for a long time, it is battle-tested. If you use Mocha, you are in good hands.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
An integration test, in our monorepo, means creating a tiny Astro project, building this project with a specific environment (development, static generation (SSG) or dynamic generation (SSR)), and then running assertions over the **built** pages. That's right, each integration test requires `vite` to build and bundle the project.

Before deciding to undertake this migration, we wanted to make sure that moving away from Mocha was not a mistake. Despite its quirks, Mocha is a very capable test runner! It's been around for a long time and is battle-tested. If you use Mocha, you are in good hands.
```
"Fine" can actually have negative connotations, especially when emphasized! (I guess it's *fine*...) so I suggested something that I think praises it the way you intended!

The idea of the PoC was to understand:

> - the flexibility of the Node.js CLI arguments and how customisable can be the test reporters;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- the flexibility of the Node.js CLI arguments and how customisable the test reporters could be;
```

- the speed of execution of the testing suites;
- the overall developer experience;

### How we started

> We started by migrating only **one** of our packages that didn't use `astro`'s integration suite, `create-astro`. This was a good opportunity to play with the built-in assertion library `node:assert`, to learn about the options, and its performance compared to Mocha.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We started by migrating only **one** of our packages that didn't already use `astro`'s integration suite: `create-astro`. This was a good opportunity to play with the built-in assertion library `node:assert`, to learn about the options it offered, and evaluate its performance compared to Mocha.
```

> Since `create-astro` only had a handful of tests, it was relatively easy to migrate the test files to use `node:test` and `node:assert`, instead of `mocha` and `chai`. After that, the only thing left is to update the `mocha` command to `node --test` to execute the tests. However, we quickly ran into issues using the `node --test` command, including:
> 
> - It had trouble parsing the glob syntax when passing multiple arguments, e.g. `node --test "test/*.test.js" --test-name-pattern="foo"`.
> - It wasn't possible to pass the `--test-concurrency` flag (only available in Node.js 21 and above), but can be worked around by using the [programmatic API](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#testname-options-fn) `concurrency` option.
> - Nitpicking, but the argument names were verbose, e.g. `--test-name-pattern` instead of `--match, -m` arguments, `--test-timeout` instead of `--timeout, -t` arguments, etc.
> 
> Hence, to solve these issues, we created a [custom script](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/3757a212c01cee03b8e96e1e9697a187ae7cc290/scripts/cmd/test.js) which can be called with the `astro-scripts test` command. This decision also proved to be useful to enable more workarounds as we'll see later.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Since `create-astro` only had a handful of tests, it was relatively easy to migrate the test files to use `node:test` and `node:assert` instead of `mocha` and `chai`. After that, the only thing left was to update the `mocha` command to `node --test` to execute the tests. However, we quickly ran into issues using the `node --test` command, including:

- It had trouble parsing the glob syntax when passing multiple arguments (e.g. `node --test "test/*.test.js" --test-name-pattern="foo"`).
- It wasn't possible to pass the `--test-concurrency` flag (only available in Node.js 21 and above), but could be worked around by using the [programmatic API](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#testname-options-fn) `concurrency` option.
- Nitpicking, but the argument names were verbose: `--test-name-pattern` instead of `--match, -m` arguments; `--test-timeout` instead of `--timeout, -t` arguments, etc.

Hence, to solve these issues, we created a [custom script](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/3757a212c01cee03b8e96e1e9697a187ae7cc290/scripts/cmd/test.js) which can be called with the `astro-scripts test` command. This decision also proved useful in order to enable more workarounds as you'll see later.
```

> ### The pandora box

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Opening Pandora's box
```
At the very least, Pandora is a name and should be capitalized. I think in English we *always* hear this phrase as the possessive "Pandora's box", so it sounded odd to hear it not that way to me. So, here's one suggestion of a way to use the phrase that way.

In a second step, we attempted to migrate the testing suites of the `@astrojs/node` package. This integration is one of our most downloaded integrations, so we have plenty of tests. Plus, the tests of this package all have **integration tests**, so it was a good opportunity to check the performance of the test runner.

> Once the PR was ready, we noticed that _Node.js test runner_ **was way slower** than Mocha. We investigated, and we discovered that Node.js spawns a new process for each test file to assure that each testing suite is run in **isolation**. Running a testing suite in isolation is, generally, a good practice, because it assures that tests run in an unpolluted environment.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Once the PR was ready, we noticed that _Node.js test runner_ **was significantly slower** than Mocha. We investigated, and we discovered that Node.js spawns a new process for each test file to assure that each testing suite is run in **isolation**. Running a testing suite in isolation is, generally, a good practice because it assures that tests run in an unpolluted environment.
```
I'm not sure whether "way slower" is a little *too* casual? If so, then here's a suggestion!

However, our testing suites are already isolated, in fact we were able to run our testing suites using the main thread with Mocha, without running into issues: side effects, polluted environments, etc. Unfortunately, Node.js didn't provide an option to _run all tests in the same thread_, so we have to come up with a solution (aren't we engineers, after all? we solve problems!).

> Using our internal `astro-scripts test` command, we are able to workaround this by creating a _temporary file that **imports** all the testing suites_, and we let Node.js test that single file. This way, only one process is spawned for the file, and we reach the same level of performance as if we were using the main process.
> 
> However, this **came with a downside**: if there's a test failure or a timeout, we aren't able to tell which test is the cause. This was the main quirk we found, and we accepted the trade-off. After all, we also accepted Mocha's trade-offs!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Using our internal `astro-scripts test` command, we were able to workaround this by creating a _temporary file that **imports** all the testing suites_, and we let Node.js test that single file. This way, only one process is spawned for the file and we reach the same level of performance as if we were using the main process.

However, this **came with its own downside**: if there's a test failure or a timeout, we weren't able to tell which test was the cause. This was the main quirk we found, and while not every team may have made this choice, we accepted this trade-off in order to give us the benefits mentioned earlier. After all, we had previously accepted Mocha's quirks!
```
As a casual reader, not knowing which test failed actually sounds like a PRETTY BIG TRADEOFF. :sweat_smile:  I think it's worth restating here what was valuable enough to accept this! (NOTE: instead of "the benefits mentioned earlier" you could also choose to explicitly state one or two here.

### Node.js `assert` and `chai`

During the migration, we had to remove the `chai` library for `node:assert/strict`. This task uncovered that with `chai`, you can execute the same check in different ways. For example, you can run an equality check at least in **four** different ways:

```js
import { expect } from "chai";

expect("foo").to.eq("foo")
expect("foo").to.be.eq("foo")
expect("foo").to.equal("foo")
expect("foo").to.be.equal("foo")
```

> From one point of view, it's good to have this kind of flexibility, but on the other hand the code of the tests becomes inconsistent. With the Node.js assertion module, you do this kind of check only in one way:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
On the one hand, it's good to have this kind of flexibility. But on the other, the code for the tests becomes inconsistent. With the Node.js assertion module, there is only one way to perform this check:
```

```js
import { assert } from "node:assert/strict";

assert.equal("foo", "foo")
```

> The Node.js assertion module **provides almost all functionalities** we required, so the migration from `chai` wasn't as painful as we thought. Our usage of `chai` was very minimal. However, **we miss** the `.includes` shortcut of `chai`:
> 
> ```js
> import { expect } from "chai";
> 
> expect("It's a fine day").includes("fine")
> ```
> 
> The Node.js assertion module doesn't provide such utility, so we ended up using the equality assertion with the `String#includes` function:

Reviewer 5: ``````suggestion
The Node.js assertion module **provides almost all of the functionalities** we required, so the migration from `chai` wasn't as painful as we thought it might be. Our use of `chai` was very minimal. However, **we do miss** the `.includes` shortcut of `chai`:

```js
import { expect } from "chai";

expect("It's a fine day").includes("fine")
```

The Node.js assertion module doesn't provide such a utility, so instead we ended up using the equality assertion with the `String#includes` function:
``````

### The results

We are quite **happy** with the results. We **haven't seen** any significant **regression in the performance** of our tests. The assertion module that Node.js provides has all utilities we needed, and the `describe`/`it` pattern is supported, so the migration from Mocha was smooth.

There are still few hiccups regarding the developer experience, when comparing it to Mocha.

For example for running *one* single test suite, with Mocha just a `it.only` is enough. With Node.js test runner you have to:
- run the CLI using the `--test-only` argument
- add the `.only` to the `describe` that contains the `it.only` you want to run
- if there are multiple `describe`, all of them needs to be marked with `.only`

Another example is the use of the `--test-name-patterns`, which could be improved. This argument is used to run only the tests that match a particular name pattern. The DX isn't great, because the CLI litters the terminal with messages about **tests that don't match** (which aren't run), which makes difficult  to understand which tests are actually run. Plus, the command **is really slow**, just for running tests that match some pattern.

> Node.js test runner is still **young**, and it has all the right cards to become better.
> 
> The Node.js project is [**evaluating**](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/51579) running tests using the main process, after we [voiced](https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/51548) our use case. In a sense, we can say that our efforts will improve Node.js!

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Node.js test runner is still **young** and with its active development, has all the right cards to become better. For example, the Node.js project is currently [**evaluating**](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/51579) running tests using the main process after we [voiced](https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/51548) our use case.

In the spirit of true open-source collaboration, we are pleased that improving Astro by switching our tests to Node.js will, in turn, improve Node.js itself!
```

---
title: "Migrating 500+ tests from Mocha to Node.js"
description: "A retrospective of how Astro migrated more than 500 test suites from Mocha to Node.js test runner."

> publishDate: "March 21, 2024"

Reviewer 5: Reminder to update to the date we actually publish!

> publishDate: "March 21, 2024"

Author: ```suggestion
publishDate: "March 25, 2024"
```

authors:
  - ema
  - bjorn
lang: "en"
coverImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/test-migration/og_astro_test_migration.webp"
socialImage: "/src/content/blog/_images/test-migration/header_astro_test_migration.webp"
---

Over a month ago, we discussed a possible migration to the Node.js test runner. While we were sufficiently happy with Mocha, we are always looking to make our CI jobs faster.

> The prospective move to relying on a test runner baked inside our runtime had some advantages for our main monorepo:
> - two fewer dependencies to install and maintain in our monorepo: `mocha` and `chai`;
> - maintainability: there are more people involved in the Node.js project to maintain the Node.js test runner;
> - future benefits: we believe that the test runner will only get better and better, and eventually save some time in our CI workflows.

Reviewer 3: Bringing back this suggestion that kinda got lost in limbo because of Git confusion.
```suggestion
Relying on a test runner baked inside our runtime had some advantages for our main monorepo:
- Two fewer dependencies to install and maintain in our monorepo: `mocha` and `chai`.
- Maintainability: there are more people involved in the Node.js project to maintain the Node.js test runner.
- Future benefits: we believe the test runner will improve with time, and eventually save some time in our CI workflows.
```

## From an idea to a PoC

The Astro monorepo has more than 500 testing suites: between integration tests and unit tests, we have 664 suites, with a total of 1603 tests. The majority of these tests are **integration** tests.

An integration test, in our monorepo, means creating a tiny Astro project, building this project with a specific environment (development, static generation (SSG) or dynamic generation (SSR)), and then running assertions over the **built** pages. That's right, each integration test requires `vite` to build and bundle the project.

Before deciding to undertake this migration, we wanted to make sure that moving away from Mocha was not a mistake. Despite its quirks, Mocha is a very capable test runner! It's been around for a long time and is battle-tested. If you use Mocha, you are in good hands.

> The idea of the PoC was to understand:
> - the flexibility of the Node.js CLI arguments and how customisable the test reporters could be;
> - the speed of execution of the testing suites;
> - the overall developer experience;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The idea of the PoC was to understand:
- The flexibility of the Node.js CLI arguments and how customizable the test reporters could be.
- The speed of execution of the testing suites.
- The overall developer experience.
```

- It wasn't possible to pass the `--test-concurrency` flag (only available in Node.js 21 and above), but could be worked around by using the [programmatic API](https://nodejs.org/api/test.html#testname-options-fn) `concurrency` option.
- Nitpicking, but the argument names were verbose: `--test-name-pattern` instead of `--match, -m` arguments; `--test-timeout` instead of `--timeout, -t` arguments, etc.

Hence, to solve these issues, we created a [custom script](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/3757a212c01cee03b8e96e1e9697a187ae7cc290/scripts/cmd/test.js) which can be called with the `astro-scripts test` command. This decision also proved useful in order to enable more workarounds as you'll see later.

### Opening Pandora's box

After successfully migrating the first package, we then attempted to migrate the testing suites of the `@astrojs/node` package. This integration is one of our most downloaded integrations, so we have plenty of tests. Plus, the tests of this package all have **integration tests**, so it was a good opportunity to check the performance of the test runner.

> Once the PR was ready, we noticed that _Node.js test runner_ **was significantly slower** than Mocha. We investigated, and we discovered that Node.js spawns a new process for each test file to assure that each testing suite is run in **isolation**. Running a testing suite in isolation is, generally, a good practice because it assures that tests run in an unpolluted environment.

Reviewer 3: `assure` -> `ensure`
```suggestion
Once the PR was ready, we noticed that _Node.js test runner_ **was significantly slower** than Mocha. We investigated, and we discovered that Node.js spawns a new process for each test file to ensure that each testing suite is run in **isolation**. Running a testing suite in isolation is, generally, a good practice because it assures that tests run in an unpolluted environment.
```

However, our testing suites were already isolated. In fact, we were able to run our testing suites with Mocha using the main thread without running into any of the typical issues: side effects, polluted environments, etc. Unfortunately, Node.js didn't provide an option to _run all tests in the same thread_. So, we had to come up with a solution to the slow test runs. (Aren't we engineers, after all? We solve problems!)

> Using our internal `astro-scripts test` command, we were able to workaround this by creating a _temporary file that **imports** all the testing suites_, and we let Node.js test that single file. This way, only one process is spawned for the file and we reach the same level of performance as if we were using the main process.

Reviewer 3: Here we're using it as a verb, so `work around` is two words!

```suggestion
Using our internal `astro-scripts test` command, we were able to work around this by creating a _temporary file that **imports** all the testing suites_, and we let Node.js test that single file. This way, only one process is spawned for the file and we reach the same level of performance as if we were using the main process.
```

> However, this **came with its own downside**: if there's a test failure or a timeout, we weren't able to tell which test was the cause. This was the main quirk we found, and while not every team may have made this choice, we accepted this trade-off in order to give us the benefits mentioned earlier. After all, we had previously accepted Mocha's quirks!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, this **came with its own downside**: if there was a test failure or a timeout, we weren't able to tell which test was the cause. This was the main quirk we found, and while not every team may have made this choice, we accepted this trade-off in order to give us the benefits mentioned earlier. After all, we had previously accepted Mocha's quirks!
```

```js
import { expect } from "chai";

expect("foo").to.eq("foo")
expect("foo").to.be.eq("foo")
expect("foo").to.equal("foo")
expect("foo").to.be.equal("foo")
```

On the one hand, it's good to have this kind of flexibility. But on the other, the code for the tests becomes inconsistent. With the Node.js assertion module, there is only one way to perform this check:

```js
import { assert } from "node:assert/strict";

assert.equal("foo", "foo")
```

The Node.js assertion module **provides almost all of the functionalities** we required, so the migration from `chai` wasn't as painful as we thought it might be. Our use of `chai` was very minimal. However, **we do miss** the `.includes` shortcut of `chai`:

```js
import { expect } from "chai";

expect("It's a fine day").includes("fine")
```

The Node.js assertion module doesn't provide such a utility, so instead we ended up using the equality assertion with the `String#includes` function:

```js
import assert from "node:assert/strict";

assert.equal("It's a fine day".includes("fine"), true)
```

> ### Here comes the dragons

Reviewer 3: [According to George R.R. Martin](https://georgerrmartin.com/notablog/2022/05/05/here-come-the-dragons/), there's no `s` in `come` here!  
```suggestion
### Here come the dragons
```

As mentioned before, we have a lot of test files and we add new tests almost every day. Opening a one-off PR that does the migration of the whole monorepo is unfeasible. It would require a lot of work from one person, and keeping the branch updated would be stressful.

So we came up with a simple plan:
- Migrate first the small packages inside the monorepo.
- Slowly migrate the main package - `astro` - by having Mocha and Node.js test runner in the same CI.
- Remove Mocha.

> In order to achieve that, we **asked for help from our community**. We thought this was the **perfect** opportunity to let people that **aren't familiar** with Astro's business logic to contribute to the project. And, we could make the migration process go more quickly.

Reviewer 3: `to` here is unnecessary AFAIK
```suggestion
In order to achieve that, we **asked for help from our community**. We thought this was the **perfect** opportunity to let people that **aren't familiar** with Astro's business logic contribute to the project. And, we could make the migration process go more quickly.
```
